---
layout: post
title: Get up and running with Jekyll!
categories: tech
comments: true
---

Ever wanted to create and maintain your own website? This very short minimalist
tutorial is going to help you do just that, using [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com)
and [GitHub pages](https://pages.github.com).

# Step 1 - Install Jekyll
First, you should install this called Jekyll. Jekyll is a tool that lets you
build static websites. It takes in raw text files in various formats, runs it
through a converter (like Markdown), and generates a complete webite that can be
served with a web server. 

On a Mac, you can install it with Homebrew:

```
brew install jekyll
```

If you're on a Debian distribution, you can do:

```
sudo apt-get install jekyll
```

If you're on Fedora or CentOS, this should do the trick:

```
yum install jekyll
```

Now the command `jekyll` should be in your path.

# Step 2 - Generate a new website

This is pretty easy, now that you've installed Jekyll. To generate a new website,
simply execute:

```
jekyll new website-name
```

Now, if you're going to use GitHub pages, you will change `website-name` to 
`username.github.io`, eventually.

Anyway, if you `cd` into your website folder and then type `jekyll serve`,
you'll find that your website is served on `localhost:4000` by default. 

Look at your static website in all its glory. But it doesn't have any of your
info yet! 

# Step 3 - Add Your Own Content

To modify your personal info, open the `_config.yml` file and change your
personal details. You can also edit the `about.md` to add a picture and a brief
personal description.

Now, you'll find that your static website is actually a blog roll. How do you
add blogs though?

Go into your `_posts` folder and find that a sample file already exists. You can
add blog posts in Markdown format to this particular folder. However, there are 
a couple of rules you'll need to follow. 

* Name your files in this format: `YYYY-MM-DD-title-goes-here.md`. The Jekyll
documentation explains [here](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/structure/) why you need to do that.

* Add a section on top with a few details, such as the layout, the title, category, etc. 
The following is a good example:

```
---
layout: post
title: Get up and running with Jekyll!
categories: tech
---
```

* You'll need to blog in Markdown. If you're new to Markdown, [check out](https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet)
this cool cheat sheet. 

Now that you've added your own content, you'll want your shiny new website to 
live on the interwebz. For that, we'll use GitHub Pages. 

#### Why use GitHub Pages?

* For one thing, it's free. 
* It lets you modify your website very conveniently by simply modifying a git
repository.

Which brings us to step 4.

# Step 4 - Create a GitHub Repository 

Go to [GitHub](http://github.com) and then create a new repository called
`username.github.io`. Now, clone the repositry onto your local machine:

```
git clone repo-url.git
```

Now, transfer *all* of the content in your website folder to this one. And now,
push everything to your GitHub repo.

```
git add *
git commit -a
git push
```

# Step 5 - Take it LIVE!

There's one final step. The webpage isn't live yet. To take it live, you'll need
to go to the `Settings` section of your GitHub repo, and then enable it to be hosted
live. To keep things simple, you can set the source to your `master` branch.

Now, go to `username.github.io` and see your website hosted live on the interwebz!
